Blog: MQTT: The common pitfalls in industrial data operations (#2709)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2024/10/mqtt-common-pitfalls-industrial-data-operations.md

### Lack of Acknowledgment Mechanisms

While the challenges of data loss and duplication in MQTT stem from its publish-subscribe architecture, another significant limitation is the **absence of an acknowledgment mechanism** for message delivery. Unlike traditional communication models, such as request-response, where a sender receives immediate confirmation that a message has been successfully transmitted and received, MQTT does not inherently provide such assurances. Consequently, there is no straightforward way to verify data transmission; users can only infer successful communication by observing corresponding changes in the end application or device.

Although this lack of visibility can create uncertainty, acknowledgment logic can be implemented to address the issue. This involves additional development to create tracking mechanisms, such as having subscribers publish a response to another topic once they receive data, while the publisher subscribes to that topic. However, this complexity may complicate integration into existing workflows

> ### TCP Limitations in MQTT Frameworks

Reviewer: this section is missing a solution or alternative

Moreover, MQTT **operates over the TCP protocol**, which introduces several challenges for industrial environments.

First, TCP requires significant processing power and memory since it maintains a connection state between devices. This demand can be particularly challenging for low-power systems. Low-power devices often enter sleep mode when inactive to conserve energy. However, the TCP handshake protocol necessitates that these devices periodically wake up to maintain their connections with the network. This frequent waking can quickly drain their batteries and may hinder overall operational efficiency.

Second, all MQTT clients must support TCP/IP, which can limit the deployment of certain low-power devices that may not have the capability to handle these requirements.

> ### Lack of Built-in Security Mechanisms

Reviewer: Can FlowFuse be used to add in the required security measures

Moreover, relying solely on secure transport layers is insufficient. It becomes crucial to implement additional security measures at different levels. For example, at the network layer, the use of firewalls, VPNs, and IPsec can help prevent intruders. At the application level, implementing username and password authentication along with access controls ensures that only authorized individuals can publish and subscribe to the broker. Selecting the right broker services is equally important, as many brokers offer essential security features that enhance overall protection. Additionally, continuous monitoring of network activity is vital to safeguard data integrity and prevent unauthorized access.

Without these robust security measures in place, MQTT communications can become targets for potential breaches, exposing sensitive data and undermining operational efficiency.

> ### Single Point of Failure and The Risks of Vendor Lock-In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single Point of Failure and the Risks of Vendor Lock-In
```

Furthermore, one significant pitfall of using MQTT is the potential for **vendor lock-in**. Many organizations may choose a specific MQTT broker or service provider based on their initial requirements, but as their operations grow and evolve, they may find it difficult to migrate to another solution. This challenge arises because different brokers may have unique features, configurations, and proprietary extensions that can complicate the migration process. The more tightly integrated a broker is with an organization’s existing systems and workflows, the harder it becomes to switch to an alternative without incurring substantial costs or operational disruptions.

Additionally, vendor lock-in can limit flexibility and innovation, forcing organizations to adapt their processes to fit the broker's capabilities rather than the other way around. If the chosen broker lacks essential features or scalability options, organizations may be stuck with inadequate solutions that do not meet their evolving needs.

> To mitigate the risks associated with **vendor lock-in**, it becomes important for organizations to prioritize interoperability when selecting an MQTT broker. Opting for open-source solutions or platforms that support standard can facilitate smoother transitions between different services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate the risks associated with **vendor lock-in**, it becomes important for organizations to prioritize interoperability when selecting an MQTT broker. Opting for open-source solutions or platforms that support standards can facilitate smoother transitions between different services.
```

> We recently announced the launch of our new MQTT broker service at FlowFuse! This service adheres to open-source standards and emphasizes robust security, featuring username and password authentication along with comprehensive access control mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse recently announced the launch of a new MQTT broker service. This service adheres to open-source standards and emphasizes robust security, featuring username and password authentication along with comprehensive access control mechanisms.
```

> With the FlowFuse Platform, you can now easily manage all your IoT devices, Node-RED instances, and MQTT clients from a centralized platform, ensuring your operations remain secure. Discover the powerful capabilities this service brings to your IoT solutions. For more details, check out our announcement blog]( todo: link to announcement blog).

Reviewer: https://flowfuse.com/blog/2024/10/announcement-mqtt-broker/

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: Summarise how FF helps overcome some of these
